While the Gallegan and la Argueello were settling matters in this way,
our good friend, Lope Asturiano, was on his way to the river, musing
upon his beloved tunny fisheries and on his sudden change of condition.
Whether it was for this reason, or that fate ordained it so, it happened
that as he was riding down a steep and narrow lane, he ran against
another water-carrier's ass, which was coming, laden, up-hill; and, as
his own was fresh and lively and in good condition, the poor,
half-starved, jaded brute that was toiling up hill, was knocked down,
the pitchers were broken, and the water spilled. The driver of the
fallen ass, enraged by this disaster, immediately flew upon the
offender, and pommelled him soundly before poor Lope well knew where he
was. At last, his senses were roused with a vengeance, and seizing his
antagonist with both hands by the throat, he dashed him to the ground.
That was not all, for, unluckily, the man's head struck violently
against a stone; the wound was frightful, and bled so profusely, that
Lope thought he had killed him. Several other water-carriers who were on
their way to and from the river, seeing their comrade so maltreated,
seized Lope and held him fast, shouting, "Justice! justice! this
water-carrier has murdered a man." And all the while they beat and
thumped him lustily. Others ran to the fallen man, and found that his
skull was cracked, and that he was almost at the last gasp. The outcry
spread all up the hill, and to the Plaza del Carmen, where it reached
the ears of an alguazil, who flew to the spot with two police-runners.
They did not arrive a moment too soon, for they found Lope surrounded by
more than a score of water-carriers, who were basting his ribs at such a
rate that there was almost as much reason to fear for his life as that
of the wounded man. The alguazil took him out of their hands, delivered
him and his ass into those of his followers, had the wounded man laid
like a sack upon his own ass, and marched them all off to prison
attended by such a crowd that they could hardly make way through the
streets. The noise drew Tomas Pedro and his master to the door, and, to
their great surprise, they saw Asturiano led by in the gripe of two
police-runners, with his face all bloody. The landlord immediately
looked about for his ass, and saw it in the hands of another catchpoll,
who had joined the alguazil's party. He inquired the cause of these
captures, was told what had happened, and was sorely distressed on
account of his ass, fearing that he should lose it, or have to pay more
for it than it was worth.

Tomas followed his comrade, but could not speak a single word to him,
such was the throng round the prisoner, and the strictness of the
catchpolls. Lope was thrust into a narrow cell in the prison, with a
doubly grated window, and the wounded man was taken to the infirmary,
where the surgeon pronounced his case extremely dangerous.

The alguazil took home the two asses with him, besides five pieces of
eight which had been found on Lope. Tomas returned greatly disconcerted
to the inn, where he found the landlord in no better spirits than
himself, and gave him an account of the condition in which he had left
his comrade, the danger of the wounded man, and the fate of the ass. "To
add to the misfortune," said he, "I have just met a gentleman of Burgos,
who tells me that my master will not now come this way. In order to make
more speed and shorten his journey by two leagues, he has crossed the
ferry at Aceca; he will sleep to-night at Orgaz, and has sent me twelve
crowns, with orders to meet him at Seville. But that cannot be, for it
is not in reason that I should leave my friend and comrade in prison and
in such peril. My master must excuse me for the present, and I know he
will, for he is so good-natured that he will put up with a little
inconvenience rather than that I should forsake my comrade. Will you do
me the favour, senor, to take this money, and see what you can do in
this business. While you are spending this, I will write to my master
for more, telling him all that has happened, and I am sure he will send
us enough to get us out of any scrape."

The host opened his eyes a palm wide in glad surprise to find himself
indemnified for the loss of his ass. He took the money and comforted
Tomas, telling him that he could make interest with persons of great
influence in Toledo, especially a nun, a relation of the corregidor's,
who could do anything she pleased with him. Now the washerwoman of the
convent in which the nun lived had a daughter, who was very thick indeed
with the sister of a friar, who was hand and glove with the said nun's
confessor. All he had to do, then, was to get the washerwoman to ask her
daughter to get the monk's sister to speak to her brother to say a good
word to the confessor, who would prevail on the nun to write a note to
the corregidor begging him to look into Lope's business, and then,
beyond a doubt, they might expect to come off with flying colours; that
is provided the water-carrier did not die of his wound, and provided
also there was no lack of stuff to grease the palms of all the officers
of justice, for unless they are well greased they creak worse than the
wheels of a bullock cart.

Whatever Tomas thought of this roundabout way of making interest, he
failed not to thank the innkeeper, and to assure him that he was
confident his master would readily send the requisite money.

Argueello, who had seen her new flame in the hands of the officers, ran
directly to the prison with some dinner for him; but she was not
permitted to see him. This was a great grief to her, but she did not
lose her hopes for all that. After the lapse of a fortnight the wounded
man was out of danger, and in a week more, the surgeon pronounced him
cured. During this time, Tomas Pedro pretended to have had fifty crowns
sent to him from Seville, and taking them out of his pocket, he
presented them to the innkeeper, along with a fictitious letter from his
master. It was nothing to the landlord whether the letter was genuine or
not, so he gave himself no trouble to authenticate it; but he received
the fifty good gold crowns with great glee. The end of the matter was,
that the wounded man was quieted with six ducats, and Asturiano was
sentenced to the forfeiture of his ass, and a fine of ten ducats with
costs, on the payment of which he was liberated.